docs/AUDIT_REPORT_OCT2024.md, before:

# Audit Report - October 2024

## Executive Summary

Comprehensive audit conducted per user request revealed several issues that have been systematically addressed. All critical issues resolved with enhanced functionality.

---

## Issues Found & Fixed

### ✅ Issue 1: Missing "Kiwi Mode" Feature
**Status**: FIXED  
**Action**: Implemented Kiwi Mode as user-friendly easy mode setting

**What is Kiwi Mode?**
- User-friendly config option for automatic ritual activation
- When enabled: Rituals activate automatically when items are placed (no fire sacrifice)
- When disabled: Fire sacrifice is required (default challenging mode)
- Perfect for new players, teaching servers, and testing

**Implementation Details:**
- Config setting: `kiwi_mode` (default: `false`)
- Automatically manages `require_fire_sacrifice` setting
- Added to both config files and documentation
- Simple toggle: `/data modify storage rituals:config kiwi_mode set value true`

**Files Modified:**
- `config/load.mcfunction` - Added kiwi_mode config option
- `load.mcfunction` - Added kiwi_mode processing logic + beautiful welcome message with clickable links
- `CONFIG_GUIDE.md` - Documented kiwi_mode with examples
- `README.md` - Added Kiwi Mode quick toggle section
- `FIRE_SACRIFICE_GUIDE.md` - Added easy Kiwi Mode instructions

**Files Created:**
- `admin/enable_kiwi_mode.mcfunction` - One-click enable with confirmation
- `admin/disable_kiwi_mode.mcfunction` - One-click disable with confirmation

**User Experience:**
- ✅ Clickable chat link on world join: **[Enable Easy Mode]**
- ✅ Clickable Modrinth page link: **[Modrinth Page]** (https://modrinth.com/datapack/totem-rituals/versions)
- ✅ One command to toggle: `/function rituals:admin/enable_kiwi_mode`
- ✅ Sound effects and visual feedback on toggle
- ✅ Toggle links within confirmation messages

### ✅ Issue 2: False Documentation - Sneak + Right Click
**Status**: FIXED  
**Location**: `README.md`, `src/main/resources/README.md`  
**Action**: Removed incorrect requirement. Totems only need right-click with item.

### ✅ Issue 3: Duplicate README with Broken Image Links
**Status**: FIXED  
**Location**: `src/main/resources/README.md`  
**Action**: Deleted duplicate file entirely. Root `README.md` is authoritative version.

### ✅ Issue 4: Growth Ritual Bonemeal Chances
**Status**: VERIFIED AS CORRECT  
**Details**:
- ✅ Wood (Tier 1): 90% chance (compensates for small 2-block radius)
- ✅ Copper (Tier 2): 75% chance
- ✅ Iron (Tier 3): 60% chance
- ✅ Gold (Tier 4): 50% chance
- ✅ Diamond (Tier 5): 40% chance
- ✅ Netherite (Tier 6): 30% chance (compensates for large 7-block radius)

**Location**: `data/rituals/function/ritual/effects/growth_scan_z.mcfunction`

### ✅ Issue 5: Instant Totem Breaking
**Status**: FIXED WITH PROGRESSIVE MINING SYSTEM  
**Implementation**:
- Wood totems: Require axe, 3 hits to break
- Copper totems: Require pickaxe, 5 hits
- Iron totems: Require pickaxe, 8 hits
- Gold totems: Require pickaxe, 10 hits
- Diamond totems: Require pickaxe, 15 hits
- Netherite totems: Require pickaxe, 20 hits

**Features**:
- Mining progress stored in entity NBT (no scoreboard conflicts)
- Visual feedback via particles (intensity increases with progress)
- Sound effects on each hit
- Progress decays after 2 seconds of no hits (anti-accident feature)
- Creative mode: Instant break
- Wrong tool: Displays message and prevents breaking

**Files Created**:
- `totem/check_tool_and_break_progressive.mcfunction`
- `totem/mine_hit.mcfunction`
- `totem/increment_mine_progress.mcfunction`
- `totem/check_mine_progress.mcfunction`
- `totem/decay_mine_progress.mcfunction`

### ✅ Issue 6: Small Totem Hitbox
**Status**: FIXED  
**Details**: Increased hitbox width from 1.0f to 1.2f (20% larger)  
**Location**: `totem/place_at_target.mcfunction`

### ✅ Issue 7: Insufficient Mermaid Chart Diversity
**Status**: FIXED  
**Action**: Added 8+ different chart types across documentation:
- Mindmap (for conceptual overviews)
- State diagrams (for entity states)
- Gantt charts (for timing visualization)
- Sankey diagrams (for data flow)
- Pie charts (for percentage breakdowns)
- Flowcharts (for processes)
- Sequence diagrams (for interactions)
- Graph diagrams (for relationships)

### ✅ Issue 8: Missing Coming Soon Rituals Documentation
**Status**: FIXED  
**Action**: Created comprehensive `COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md` with 11 planned advanced rituals:
1. ~~Auto-Farming Ritual~~ (already implemented with Diamond Hoe!)
2. Auto-Breeding Ritual (animals)
3. Auto-Smelting Ritual (instant smelting)
4. Flight Zone Ritual (creative flight)
5. Weather Control Ritual (local weather)
6. Time Warp Ritual (time acceleration)
7. Mining Haste Ritual (extreme haste + auto-pickup)
8. **Item Vacuum Ritual** (hopper enchantment - as requested)
9. Forcefield Ritual (mob barrier)
10. XP Harvester Ritual (XP banking)
11. Enchanting Nexus Ritual (custom enchants)
12. Mob Repellent Ritual (spawn prevention)

**Special Note**: Item Vacuum Ritual now properly documented as a custom enchantment/crafting ritual that permanently enhances a hopper when placed on a 6+ totem hex pattern.

---

## Technical Improvements

### Entity NBT vs Scoreboards
**Problem**: Scoreboards can conflict with other datapacks/mods  
**Solution**: Mining progress now stored in entity NBT data:
```mcfunction
data.rituals.mine_progress  # Hit counter
data.rituals.mine_decay      # Decay timer
```

This approach:
- ✅ Zero conflict risk with other datapacks
- ✅ Data isolated to individual entities
- ✅ Survives server restarts
- ✅ No global scoreboard pollution

---

## Documentation Structure

All documentation now consolidated in `/docs` directory:

```mermaid
graph TD
    Root[/docs/] --> Getting[Getting Started]
    Root --> Core[Core Mechanics]
    Root --> Patterns[Pattern Rituals]
    Root --> Future[Future Content]
    Root --> Reference[Reference]
    
    Getting --> INST[INSTALLATION.md]
    Getting --> FIRE[FIRE_SACRIFICE_GUIDE.md]
    Getting --> QUICK[FIRE_SACRIFICE_QUICK_REFERENCE.md]
    
    Core --> SYS[SYSTEM_OVERVIEW.md]
    Core --> CFG[CONFIG_GUIDE.md]
    Core --> RNG[RANGE_DIAGRAM.md]
    
    Patterns --> PAT_GUIDE[PATTERN_RITUALS_GUIDE.md]
    Patterns --> PAT_MULTI[MULTI_TOTEM_PATTERNS.md]
    Patterns --> PAT_VIZ[PATTERN_VISUALIZATION_BEHAVIOR.md]
    Patterns --> PAT_IMPL[IMPLEMENTATION_SUMMARY.md]
    
    Future --> COMING[COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md ✨]
    
    Reference --> CRAFT[CRAFTING_RECIPES.md]
    Reference --> GUIDE[GUIDEBOOK_CONTENT.md]
    Reference --> CHANGE[CHANGELOG.md]
    
    style COMING fill:#FFD700,stroke:#FFA500,stroke-width:3px
    style Future fill:#FFF8DC,stroke:#FFD700
```

---

## Files Modified

### Datapack Functions
- ✅ `load.mcfunction` - Removed conflicting scoreboards
- ✅ `totem/place_at_target.mcfunction` - Increased hitbox
- ✅ `totem/update.mcfunction` - Added mining decay check
- ✅ `totem/check_tool_and_break_progressive.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/mine_hit.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/increment_mine_progress.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/check_mine_progress.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/decay_mine_progress.mcfunction` - NEW

### Documentation
- ✅ `README.md` - Removed sneak requirement, added links
- ✅ `docs/README.md` - Added COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md link
- ✅ `docs/SYSTEM_OVERVIEW.md` - Added state diagram chart
- ✅ `docs/COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md` - NEW (comprehensive future rituals)
- ✅ `docs/AUDIT_REPORT_OCT2024.md` - NEW (this document)
- ❌ `src/main/resources/README.md` - DELETED (duplicate)

---

## Quality Assurance

All changes follow project standards:
- ✅ Professional documentation persona maintained
- ✅ Technical accuracy for non-IT readers
- ✅ No inline JS/CSS/HTML in data files
- ✅ Proper specificity (no !important in CSS)
- ✅ Mermaid charts used generously with variation
- ✅ No sailor references in persona (just the cursing! 😈)
- ✅ Conventional commit syntax ready

---

## Testing Recommendations

Before deployment, test:
1. **Progressive Mining**: Hit totems with correct/incorrect tools
2. **Decay System**: Start mining, wait 2 seconds, verify reset
3. **Hitbox Size**: Break totems from various angles
4. **Growth Ritual**: Verify 90% success rate on wood tier
5. **Documentation Links**: Verify all markdown links work

---

## Summary Statistics

- **Files Modified**: 14
- **Files Created**: 6
- **Files Deleted**: 1
- **Issues Fixed**: 8 (all resolved!)
- **Documentation Pages Enhanced**: 4
- **New Features**: Progressive mining system
- **Mermaid Chart Types Used**: 8+
- **Coming Soon Rituals Documented**: 12

---

*"Arr, this codebase be ship-shape now, ye scurvy dog!"* ☠️ (ノ◕ヮ◕)ノ*:・゚✧

---

**Audit Completed**: October 14, 2025  
**Correction Made**: October 14, 2025 - Clarified Auto-Farming is already implemented (not "coming soon")  
**Next Steps**: User review and testing phase

Commit message:

refactor: remove unsupported crafting rituals and update documentation
- Deleted unsupported crafting rituals (Auto-Smelting, Item Vacuum, Enchanting Nexus) due to limitations with datapacks.
- Updated CHANGELOG and COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md to reflect the removal of these rituals and clarified future plans.
- Revised README and other documentation to align with the current state of ritual functionalities and patterns.

docs/AUDIT_REPORT_OCT2024.md, after:

# Audit Report - October 2024

## Executive Summary

Comprehensive audit conducted per user request revealed several issues that have been systematically addressed. All critical issues resolved with enhanced functionality.

---

## Issues Found & Fixed

### ✅ Issue 1: Missing "Kiwi Mode" Feature
**Status**: FIXED  
**Action**: Implemented Kiwi Mode as user-friendly easy mode setting

**What is Kiwi Mode?**
- User-friendly config option for automatic ritual activation
- When enabled: Rituals activate automatically when items are placed (no fire sacrifice)
- When disabled: Fire sacrifice is required (default challenging mode)
- Perfect for new players, teaching servers, and testing

**Implementation Details:**
- Config setting: `kiwi_mode` (default: `false`)
- Automatically manages `require_fire_sacrifice` setting
- Added to both config files and documentation
- Simple toggle: `/data modify storage rituals:config kiwi_mode set value true`

**Files Modified:**
- `config/load.mcfunction` - Added kiwi_mode config option
- `load.mcfunction` - Added kiwi_mode processing logic + beautiful welcome message with clickable links
- `CONFIG_GUIDE.md` - Documented kiwi_mode with examples
- `README.md` - Added Kiwi Mode quick toggle section
- `FIRE_SACRIFICE_GUIDE.md` - Added easy Kiwi Mode instructions

**Files Created:**
- `admin/enable_kiwi_mode.mcfunction` - One-click enable with confirmation
- `admin/disable_kiwi_mode.mcfunction` - One-click disable with confirmation

**User Experience:**
- ✅ Clickable chat link on world join: **[Enable Easy Mode]**
- ✅ Clickable Modrinth page link: **[Modrinth Page]** (https://modrinth.com/datapack/totem-rituals/versions)
- ✅ One command to toggle: `/function rituals:admin/enable_kiwi_mode`
- ✅ Sound effects and visual feedback on toggle
- ✅ Toggle links within confirmation messages

### ✅ Issue 2: False Documentation - Sneak + Right Click
**Status**: FIXED  
**Location**: `README.md`, `src/main/resources/README.md`  
**Action**: Removed incorrect requirement. Totems only need right-click with item.

### ✅ Issue 3: Duplicate README with Broken Image Links
**Status**: FIXED  
**Location**: `src/main/resources/README.md`  
**Action**: Deleted duplicate file entirely. Root `README.md` is authoritative version.

### ✅ Issue 4: Growth Ritual Bonemeal Chances
**Status**: VERIFIED AS CORRECT  
**Details**:
- ✅ Wood (Tier 1): 90% chance (compensates for small 2-block radius)
- ✅ Copper (Tier 2): 75% chance
- ✅ Iron (Tier 3): 60% chance
- ✅ Gold (Tier 4): 50% chance
- ✅ Diamond (Tier 5): 40% chance
- ✅ Netherite (Tier 6): 30% chance (compensates for large 7-block radius)

**Location**: `data/rituals/function/ritual/effects/growth_scan_z.mcfunction`

### ✅ Issue 5: Instant Totem Breaking
**Status**: FIXED WITH PROGRESSIVE MINING SYSTEM  
**Implementation**:
- Wood totems: Require axe, 3 hits to break
- Copper totems: Require pickaxe, 5 hits
- Iron totems: Require pickaxe, 8 hits
- Gold totems: Require pickaxe, 10 hits
- Diamond totems: Require pickaxe, 15 hits
- Netherite totems: Require pickaxe, 20 hits

**Features**:
- Mining progress stored in entity NBT (no scoreboard conflicts)
- Visual feedback via particles (intensity increases with progress)
- Sound effects on each hit
- Progress decays after 2 seconds of no hits (anti-accident feature)
- Creative mode: Instant break
- Wrong tool: Displays message and prevents breaking

**Files Created**:
- `totem/check_tool_and_break_progressive.mcfunction`
- `totem/mine_hit.mcfunction`
- `totem/increment_mine_progress.mcfunction`
- `totem/check_mine_progress.mcfunction`
- `totem/decay_mine_progress.mcfunction`

### ✅ Issue 6: Small Totem Hitbox
**Status**: FIXED  
**Details**: Increased hitbox width from 1.0f to 1.2f (20% larger)  
**Location**: `totem/place_at_target.mcfunction`

### ✅ Issue 7: Insufficient Mermaid Chart Diversity
**Status**: FIXED  
**Action**: Added 8+ different chart types across documentation:
- Mindmap (for conceptual overviews)
- State diagrams (for entity states)
- Gantt charts (for timing visualization)
- Sankey diagrams (for data flow)
- Pie charts (for percentage breakdowns)
- Flowcharts (for processes)
- Sequence diagrams (for interactions)
- Graph diagrams (for relationships)

### ✅ Issue 8: Missing Coming Soon Rituals Documentation
**Status**: FIXED  
**Action**: Created comprehensive `COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md` with 11 planned advanced rituals:
1. ~~Auto-Farming Ritual~~ (already implemented with Diamond Hoe!)
2. Auto-Breeding Ritual (animals)
3. (Removed - not possible with datapacks)
4. Flight Zone Ritual (creative flight)
5. Weather Control Ritual (local weather)
6. Time Warp Ritual (time acceleration)
7. Mining Haste Ritual (extreme haste + auto-pickup)
8. (Removed - not possible with datapacks)
9. Forcefield Ritual (mob barrier)
10. XP Harvester Ritual (XP banking)
11. (Removed - not possible with datapacks)
12. Mob Repellent Ritual (spawn prevention)

**Note**: Several "crafting ritual" concepts were removed as they're impossible to implement with datapacks alone - they would require Fabric/Forge mods.

---

## Technical Improvements

### Entity NBT vs Scoreboards
**Problem**: Scoreboards can conflict with other datapacks/mods  
**Solution**: Mining progress now stored in entity NBT data:
```mcfunction
data.rituals.mine_progress  # Hit counter
data.rituals.mine_decay      # Decay timer
```

This approach:
- ✅ Zero conflict risk with other datapacks
- ✅ Data isolated to individual entities
- ✅ Survives server restarts
- ✅ No global scoreboard pollution

---

## Documentation Structure

All documentation now consolidated in `/docs` directory:

```mermaid
graph TD
    Root[/docs/] --> Getting[Getting Started]
    Root --> Core[Core Mechanics]
    Root --> Patterns[Pattern Rituals]
    Root --> Future[Future Content]
    Root --> Reference[Reference]
    
    Getting --> INST[INSTALLATION.md]
    Getting --> FIRE[FIRE_SACRIFICE_GUIDE.md]
    Getting --> QUICK[FIRE_SACRIFICE_QUICK_REFERENCE.md]
    
    Core --> SYS[SYSTEM_OVERVIEW.md]
    Core --> CFG[CONFIG_GUIDE.md]
    Core --> RNG[RANGE_DIAGRAM.md]
    
    Patterns --> PAT_GUIDE[PATTERN_RITUALS_GUIDE.md]
    Patterns --> PAT_MULTI[MULTI_TOTEM_PATTERNS.md]
    Patterns --> PAT_VIZ[PATTERN_VISUALIZATION_BEHAVIOR.md]
    Patterns --> PAT_IMPL[IMPLEMENTATION_SUMMARY.md]
    
    Future --> COMING[COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md ✨]
    
    Reference --> CRAFT[CRAFTING_RECIPES.md]
    Reference --> GUIDE[GUIDEBOOK_CONTENT.md]
    Reference --> CHANGE[CHANGELOG.md]
    
    style COMING fill:#FFD700,stroke:#FFA500,stroke-width:3px
    style Future fill:#FFF8DC,stroke:#FFD700
```

---

## Files Modified

### Datapack Functions
- ✅ `load.mcfunction` - Removed conflicting scoreboards
- ✅ `totem/place_at_target.mcfunction` - Increased hitbox
- ✅ `totem/update.mcfunction` - Added mining decay check
- ✅ `totem/check_tool_and_break_progressive.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/mine_hit.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/increment_mine_progress.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/check_mine_progress.mcfunction` - NEW
- ✅ `totem/decay_mine_progress.mcfunction` - NEW

### Documentation
- ✅ `README.md` - Removed sneak requirement, added links
- ✅ `docs/README.md` - Added COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md link
- ✅ `docs/SYSTEM_OVERVIEW.md` - Added state diagram chart
- ✅ `docs/COMING_SOON_RITUALS.md` - NEW (comprehensive future rituals)
- ✅ `docs/AUDIT_REPORT_OCT2024.md` - NEW (this document)
- ❌ `src/main/resources/README.md` - DELETED (duplicate)

---

## Quality Assurance

All changes follow project standards:
- ✅ Professional documentation persona maintained
- ✅ Technical accuracy for non-IT readers
- ✅ No inline JS/CSS/HTML in data files
- ✅ Proper specificity (no !important in CSS)
- ✅ Mermaid charts used generously with variation
- ✅ No sailor references in persona (just the cursing! 😈)
- ✅ Conventional commit syntax ready

---

## Testing Recommendations

Before deployment, test:
1. **Progressive Mining**: Hit totems with correct/incorrect tools
2. **Decay System**: Start mining, wait 2 seconds, verify reset
3. **Hitbox Size**: Break totems from various angles
4. **Growth Ritual**: Verify 90% success rate on wood tier
5. **Documentation Links**: Verify all markdown links work

---

## Summary Statistics

- **Files Modified**: 14
- **Files Created**: 6
- **Files Deleted**: 1
- **Issues Fixed**: 8 (all resolved!)
- **Documentation Pages Enhanced**: 4
- **New Features**: Progressive mining system
- **Mermaid Chart Types Used**: 8+
- **Coming Soon Rituals Documented**: 12

---

*"Arr, this codebase be ship-shape now, ye scurvy dog!"* ☠️ (ノ◕ヮ◕)ノ*:・゚✧

---

**Audit Completed**: October 14, 2025  
**Correction Made**: October 14, 2025 - Clarified Auto-Farming is already implemented (not "coming soon")  
**Next Steps**: User review and testing phase
