docs/technical/SOUL_EMBODIMENT_DESIGN.md, before:

# Soul Embodiment System - Technical Design Document

**Version:** 1.0.0  
**Target:** Minecraft 1.21.11  
**Platform:** Datapack + Optional Fabric Mod  

---

## 1. Executive Summary

The Soul Embodiment system transforms vanilla Minecraft tools and weapons into persistent, leveling "living items" that track player actions via vanilla statistics, accumulate experience, and gain randomized buffs/debuffs through a progression system spanning 100 levels across 18 ascension tiers.

This document provides complete technical specifications for developers, server administrators, and contributors.

---

## 2. System Architecture

### 2.1 High-Level Overview

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Ritual Layer"
        R1[Soul Embodiment Ritual<br/>Star Pattern Detection]
        R2[Soul Ascension Ritual<br/>Level Cap Increase]
    end
    
    subgraph "Core Systems"
        C1[Item Data Manager<br/>custom_data storage]
        C2[XP Tracking System<br/>Statistics-based]
        C3[Level Processor<br/>Threshold checks]
        C4[Buff/Debuff Engine<br/>Stacking & conflicts]
    end
    
    subgraph "I/O Systems"
        I1[Totem Sync<br/>Item pickup]
        I2[Scrying Glass<br/>Portable sync]
        I3[Lore Generator<br/>Dynamic tooltips]
        I4[Comment System<br/>Random speech]
    end
    
    subgraph "Configuration"
        CF1[XP Rates<br/>mcfunction files]
        CF2[Soul Names<br/>JSON config]
        CF3[Comments<br/>JSON config]
    end
    
    R1 --> C1
    R2 --> C1
    C2 --> C3
    C3 --> C4
    C4 --> I3
    I1 --> C2
    I2 --> C2
    CF1 --> C2
    CF2 --> I3
    CF3 --> I4
    
    style R1 fill:#4a148c,color:#fff
    style R2 fill:#4a148c,color:#fff
    style C1 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style C2 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style C3 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style C4 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style I1 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I2 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I3 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I4 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
```

### 2.2 Data Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant P as Player
    participant T as Tick System
    participant S as Statistics
    participant X as XP Calculator
    participant I as Item NBT
    participant L as Lore Generator
    
    P->>P: Uses soul weapon
    P->>S: Vanilla stat increments
    T->>S: Read current stats
    T->>T: Calculate delta from previous
    T->>X: Pass delta to calculator
    X->>X: Apply XP rates per block/mob
    X->>I: Store pending XP in scoreboard
    
    Note over P,I: On Sync (Totem/Scrying)
    
    P->>I: Trigger sync
    I->>I: Apply pending XP
    I->>I: Check level threshold
    I->>I: Roll buff/debuff
    I->>L: Request lore update
    L->>I: Write new lore component
```

---

## 3. Data Storage Schema

### 3.1 Item Custom Data Structure

```json
{
  "minecraft:custom_data": {
    // Core identification
    "soul_embodied": true,
    "soul_type": "sword",
    
    // Identity
    "soul_name": "Grimfang",
    "soul_display_name": "Grimfang",
    
    // Progression
    "soul_level": 47,
    "soul_xp": 12850,
    "soul_xp_total": 98420,
    "soul_ascension_tier": 7,
    "soul_level_cap": 50,
    
    // Buff/Debuff tracking
    "soul_buff_levels": {
      "haste": 2,
      "strength": 3,
      "magnetic": 1
    },
    "soul_debuff_levels": {
      "hungry": 1
    },
    
    // State flags
    "soul_ready_ascend": false,
    "soul_fractured": false,
    
    // Statistics
    "soul_kills": 2847,
    "soul_blocks_broken": 15420
  }
}
```

### 3.2 Scoreboard Objectives

| Objective | Type | Purpose |
|-----------|------|---------|
| `rituals.soul_xp_gain` | dummy | Pending XP to sync |
| `rituals.soul_holder` | dummy | Marks soul item holders |
| `rituals.pickaxe_mined` | dummy | Running total for pickaxe |
| `rituals.shovel_mined` | dummy | Running total for shovel |
| `rituals.axe_mined` | dummy | Running total for axe |
| `rituals.hoe_mined` | dummy | Running total for hoe |
| `rituals.sword_kills` | dummy | Running total for sword |
| `rituals.prev_mined` | dummy | Previous value for delta |
| `rituals.soul_speak_cd` | dummy | Comment cooldown timer |
| `rituals.m_*` | minecraft.mined:* | 500+ block tracking |
| `rituals.k_*` | minecraft.killed:* | 50+ mob tracking |

### 3.3 Storage Namespace

```
rituals:soul
├── level_thresholds[]     # XP required per level (100 entries)
├── tier_caps[]            # Level cap per tier [15,20,25,...,100]
├── fallback_names[]       # Default soul names
├── bonus_chance           # Ascension bonus % (default: 50)
└── xp_values{}            # Base XP multipliers

rituals:temp
├── soul_type              # Current operation soul type
├── lore_level             # Level for lore generation
└── buff_roll              # Random roll result
```

---

## 4. XP Tracking System

### 4.1 Statistics-Based Tracking

The system uses vanilla `minecraft.mined:*` and `minecraft.killed:*` statistics instead of durability tracking. This ensures:
- Unbreaking enchantment doesn't slow XP gain
- Netherite tools gain XP at the same rate as iron
- Accurate tracking even with efficiency enchantments

### 4.2 Block XP Mapping

```mermaid
pie showData
    title Pickaxe XP Distribution by Block Tier
    "Basic Stone (1 XP)" : 65
    "Special Stone (2 XP)" : 15
    "Common Ores (2-4 XP)" : 10
    "Rare Ores (10-25 XP)" : 8
    "Special (3-5 XP)" : 2
```

#### Pickaxe Blocks (400+ blocks tracked)

| Category | XP Value | Examples |
|----------|----------|----------|
| Basic Stone | 1 | Stone, Cobblestone, Deepslate variants |
| Processed Stone | 1 | Bricks, Terracotta, Concrete |
| Prismarine/Quartz | 2 | All prismarine variants, quartz blocks |
| End Blocks | 2 | End stone, Purpur |
| Coal/Copper Ore | 2 | Including deepslate variants |
| Iron Ore | 3 | Including deepslate variants |
| Redstone/Quartz Ore | 3 | Nether quartz ore |
| Gold/Lapis Ore | 4 | Including nether gold |
| Diamond Ore | 10 | Including deepslate variants |
| Emerald Ore | 12 | Including deepslate variants |
| Ancient Debris | 25 | Netherite source |
| Obsidian | 3 | Regular and crying |

#### Mob XP Mapping (50+ mobs tracked)

| Tier | XP Value | Examples |
|------|----------|----------|
| Passive | 2 | Pig, Cow, Sheep, Chicken |
| Common | 5 | Zombie, Skeleton, Spider, Creeper |
| Uncommon | 10 | Enderman, Witch, Piglin |
| Dangerous | 15 | Blaze, Ghast, Wither Skeleton |
| Elite | 25 | Evoker, Ravager, Elder Guardian |
| Warden | 100 | Ancient City guardian |
| Boss | 500 | Wither, Ender Dragon |

### 4.3 Delta Calculation

```mcfunction
# Calculate XP gained since last check
scoreboard players operation @s rituals.pickaxe_mined = #total rituals.soul_temp
scoreboard players operation #xp_gain rituals.soul_temp = @s rituals.pickaxe_mined
scoreboard players operation #xp_gain rituals.soul_temp -= @s rituals.prev_mined

# Award XP if positive delta
execute if score #xp_gain rituals.soul_temp matches 1.. run function rituals:soul/award_xp
scoreboard players operation @s rituals.prev_mined = @s rituals.pickaxe_mined
```

---

## 5. Leveling System

### 5.1 XP Curve Formula

```
XP_required(level) = base_xp × (level ^ 1.5) + (level × 50)
```

Where `base_xp = 100`

### 5.2 Level Thresholds

| Level | XP Required | Cumulative | Tier |
|-------|-------------|------------|------|
| 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| 15 | 2,808 | 14,808 | 1 MAX |
| 20 | 3,944 | 24,944 | 2 |
| 50 | 11,221 | 122,221 | 8 |
| 75 | 16,894 | 218,394 | 13 |
| 100 | 28,631 | 420,631 | 18 MAX |

### 5.3 Tier Progression

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Tier1: Awakening Ritual
    
    Tier1 --> Tier1: Level 1-15
    Tier1 --> Tier2: Ascension I
    
    Tier2 --> Tier2: Level 16-20
    Tier2 --> Tier3: Ascension II
    
    Tier3 --> TierN: ...continues...
    TierN --> Tier17: Ascension XVI
    
    Tier17 --> Tier17: Level 91-95
    Tier17 --> Tier18: Final Ascension
    
    Tier18 --> Tier18: Level 96-100
    Tier18 --> [*]: OMEGA Achieved
```

---

## 6. Buff/Debuff System

### 6.1 Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Level Up Triggered] --> B{Roll Buff}
    B --> C[Select Random Buff]
    C --> D{Already Have Buff?}
    D -->|No| E[Apply New Buff]
    D -->|Yes| F{At Max Stack?}
    F -->|No| G[Increment Stack Level]
    F -->|Yes| H[Re-roll Different Buff]
    
    A --> I{Roll Debuff<br/>30% chance}
    I -->|No| J[No Debuff]
    I -->|Yes| K[Select Random Debuff]
    K --> L{Check Incompatibility}
    L -->|Blocked| M[Debuff Blocked]
    L -->|OK| N{Already Have Debuff?}
    N -->|No| O[Apply New Debuff]
    N -->|Yes| P{At Max Stack?}
    P -->|No| Q[Increment Stack Level]
    P -->|Yes| R[Re-roll]
    
    A --> S{Roll Fracture<br/>10% chance}
    S -->|Yes| T[SOUL FRACTURED<br/>Permanent]
```

### 6.2 Buff Registry

| ID | Name | Max Level | Per Level | Type |
|----|------|-----------|-----------|------|
| `haste` | Soul Haste | 3 | +10% mining speed | Attribute |
| `glow` | Soul Sight | 1 | Glowing 10 blocks | Effect |
| `magnetic` | Magnetic Pull | 2 | +2 block radius | Special |
| `reach` | Extended Reach | 3 | +0.5 block reach | Attribute |
| `repair` | Soul Mending | 3 | 0.5% repair/tick | Special |
| `lucky` | Fortune's Favor | 2 | +0.5 luck | Attribute |
| `swift` | Soul Speed | 3 | +3% movement | Attribute |
| `strong` | Soul Strength | 4 | +0.5 attack damage | Attribute |
| `tough` | Soul Armor | 3 | +1 armor | Attribute |
| `jump` | Featherweight | 1 | Jump Boost I | Potion |
| `flame` | Soul Flame | 2 | 10% ignite chance | Special |
| `leech` | Soul Leech | 2 | 5% lifesteal | Special |
| `wisdom` | Soul Wisdom | 2 | +10% XP gain | Special |
| `harvest` | Soul Harvest | 2 | Looting I per level | Special |
| `unbreaking` | Eternal Edge | 2 | 25% less durability | Special |
| `nightvis` | Dark Vision | 1 | Night Vision (15s) | Potion |
| `waterbreath` | Aquatic Soul | 1 | Water Breathing (10s) | Potion |
| `fireresist` | Flame Ward | 1 | Fire Resist (10s) | Potion |
| `saturation` | Soul Sustenance | 2 | Tiny saturation | Special |
| `reserved` | Reserved Soul | 1 | 8-75 min comments | Personality |

### 6.3 Debuff Registry

| ID | Name | Max Level | Per Level | Type |
|----|------|-----------|-----------|------|
| `hungry` | Ravenous Soul | 2 | 0.25%/tick hunger | Special |
| `heavy` | Burdened | 2 | -3% movement | Attribute |
| `cursed` | Cursed Aura | 1 | Rare Bad Omen | Special |
| `fragile` | Brittle Edge | 2 | +25% durability loss | Special |
| `restless` | Restless Soul | 1 | Alerts nearby mobs | Special |
| `clumsy` | Clumsy Grip | 2 | Mining fatigue chance | Special |
| `unlucky` | Misfortune | 2 | -0.5 luck | Attribute |
| `xp_hungry` | Soul Hunger | 2 | +20% XP needed | Special |
| `paranoid` | Paranoid Soul | 1 | Random spooky sounds | Special |
| `bloodthirst` | Bloodthirst | 1 | 1 dmg/30s if no combat | Special |
| `chatty` | Chatty Soul | 1 | 2-35 min comments | Personality |

### 6.4 Incompatibility Matrix

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Blocked Pairs"
        A[Swift] <--> B[Heavy]
        C[Lucky] <--> D[Unlucky]
        E[Repair] <--> F[Fragile]
        G[Unbreaking] <--> H[Fragile]
        I[Saturation] <--> J[Hungry]
        K[Reserved] <--> L[Chatty]
        M[Fireresist] <--> N[Waterbreath]
        O[Fireresist] <--> P[Soulfire]
    end
    
    style A fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style C fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style E fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style G fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style K fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style M fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style O fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style B fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style D fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style F fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style H fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style J fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style L fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style N fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style P fill:#c62828,color:#fff
```

---

## 7. File Structure

```
data/rituals/function/
├── soul/
│   ├── init.mcfunction              # System initialization
│   ├── tick.mcfunction              # Per-tick processing
│   ├── awaken_item.mcfunction       # Item transformation
│   ├── check_player_action.mcfunction # Route to tool handlers
│   ├── award_xp.mcfunction          # XP accumulation
│   ├── sync_from_totem.mcfunction   # Apply pending XP
│   ├── process_level_up.mcfunction  # Level threshold check
│   ├── do_level_up.mcfunction       # Apply level increase
│   ├── mark_ready_ascend.mcfunction # Cap reached flag
│   │
│   ├── actions/
│   │   ├── mining.mcfunction        # Pickaxe XP (400+ blocks)
│   │   ├── digging.mcfunction       # Shovel XP
│   │   ├── chopping.mcfunction      # Axe XP (blocks)
│   │   ├── harvesting.mcfunction    # Hoe XP
│   │   ├── combat.mcfunction        # Sword XP
│   │   ├── axe_combat.mcfunction    # Axe XP (mobs)
│   │   └── ranged.mcfunction        # Bow/Crossbow XP
│   │
│   ├── scoreboards/
│   │   ├── load.mcfunction          # Master loader
│   │   ├── pickaxe.mcfunction       # 400+ block objectives
│   │   ├── shovel.mcfunction        # Shovel block objectives
│   │   ├── axe.mcfunction           # Axe block objectives
│   │   ├── hoe.mcfunction           # Hoe block objectives
│   │   └── combat.mcfunction        # Mob kill objectives
│   │
│   ├── buffs/
│   │   ├── init.mcfunction          # Registry initialization
│   │   ├── roll_on_levelup.mcfunction
│   │   ├── roll_buff.mcfunction
│   │   ├── roll_debuff.mcfunction
│   │   ├── apply_buff.mcfunction
│   │   ├── apply_debuff.mcfunction
│   │   └── apply_effects.mcfunction # Apply held item effects
│   │
│   ├── lore/
│   │   ├── build_full.mcfunction    # Construct lore array
│   │   └── apply_full.mcfunction    # Write to item
│   │
│   ├── name/
│   │   ├── apply_display.mcfunction # Set custom_name
│   │   └── detect_anvil_rename.mcfunction
│   │
│   └── comments/
│       └── try_speak.mcfunction     # Random comment trigger
│
├── ritual/patterns/star/
│   ├── detect_soul_embodiment.mcfunction
│   ├── activate_soul_embodiment.mcfunction
│   ├── detect_soul_ascension.mcfunction
│   ├── activate_soul_ascension.mcfunction
│   └── route_soul_ritual.mcfunction
│
└── config/
    ├── load.mcfunction              # Main config loader
    └── soul_xp/
        ├── load.mcfunction          # XP config loader
        ├── pickaxe_blocks.mcfunction
        ├── shovel_blocks.mcfunction
        ├── axe_blocks.mcfunction
        └── hoe_blocks.mcfunction
```

---

## 8. Configuration

### 8.1 XP Rates

Located in `data/rituals/function/config/load.mcfunction`:

```mcfunction
# Base XP per action type
data modify storage rituals:soul xp_values set value {
    block_mined: 1,
    ore_mined: 5,
    mob_killed: 10,
    boss_killed: 100
}

# Ascension bonus chance (0-100)
data modify storage rituals:soul bonus_chance set value 50

# Debuff chance (0-100)  
data modify storage rituals:soul debuff_chance set value 30

# Fracture chance (0-100)
data modify storage rituals:soul fracture_chance set value 10
```

### 8.2 Block XP Configuration

Located in `data/rituals/function/config/soul_xp/*.mcfunction`:

```mcfunction
# Example: pickaxe_blocks.mcfunction
# Diamond ore = 10 XP
data modify storage rituals:soul_xp pickaxe.diamond_ore set value 10
data modify storage rituals:soul_xp pickaxe.deepslate_diamond_ore set value 10

# Ancient debris = 25 XP
data modify storage rituals:soul_xp pickaxe.ancient_debris set value 25
```

### 8.3 JSON Configs

Located in `config/rituals/`:

| File | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `soul_names.json` | 500+ names per tool type |
| `soul_comments.json` | 150+ random comments |
| `soul_settings.json` | System parameters |

---

## 9. Performance Considerations

### 9.1 Optimizations Implemented

1. **Statistics-based tracking** - No per-tick durability checks
2. **Delta calculation** - Only process XP changes, not absolute values
3. **Cooldown-based comments** - Not probability per tick
4. **Batched lore updates** - Only on sync, not continuous
5. **Conditional tick execution** - Skip players without soul items

### 9.2 Tick Complexity

| Operation | Frequency | Complexity |
|-----------|-----------|------------|
| Soul holder check | Every tick | O(players) |
| XP tracking | Every tick (if holding) | O(1) per player |
| Lore update | On sync only | O(1) |
| Comment roll | Cooldown-based | O(1) |
| Buff effects | Every tick (if holding) | O(buffs) |

---

## 10. Compatibility

### 10.1 Vanilla Minecraft

- ✅ Enchanting table fully functional
- ✅ Anvil repairs preserve soul data
- ✅ Grindstone removes enchants, keeps soul
- ✅ Anvil renaming preserves decorators
- ✅ All vanilla enchantments compatible

### 10.2 Data Storage Isolation

```
Item Components:
├── minecraft:custom_data     ← Soul system uses ONLY this
├── minecraft:enchantments    ← Vanilla enchantments (untouched)
├── minecraft:custom_name     ← Formatted display name
├── minecraft:lore            ← Dynamic tooltip
└── minecraft:damage          ← Durability (untouched)
```

---

## 11. Known Limitations

1. **Item stacking** - Soul items cannot stack (unique data per item)
2. **Creative mode** - XP tracking uses survival statistics only
3. **Silk Touch mining** - Ore XP based on block broken, not drops
4. **Mob farms** - All kills count regardless of kill method
5. **Item cloning** - Duplicated items share soul identity (by design)

---

## 12. Future Enhancements

- [ ] Per-player soul weapon leaderboards
- [ ] Soul weapon trading/gifting system
- [ ] Custom particle effects for high-level souls
- [ ] Soul fusion (combine two soul weapons)
- [ ] Achievement system for soul milestones

---

## 13. References

- [Minecraft Wiki - Statistics](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Statistics)
- [Minecraft Wiki - Item Components](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Data_component_format)
- [Rituals Datapack Documentation](../README.md)

---

*Document maintained by the Rituals development team.*

Commit message:

feat: enhance soul embodiment mechanics and guidebook
- Updated soul embodiment ritual to clarify that the wielder's soul absorbs experience from deeds, which is then channeled into the weapon via totem conduits.
- Revised success messages to reflect the new mechanics, emphasizing the bond between the wielder and the weapon.
- Enhanced the guidebook with detailed explanations about soul energy flow and the implications of soul embodiment, including warnings about using non-tool items.
- Improved documentation for clarity on XP accumulation and syncing processes.

docs/technical/SOUL_EMBODIMENT_DESIGN.md, after:

# Soul Embodiment System - Technical Design Document

**Version:** 1.0.0  
**Target:** Minecraft 1.21.11  
**Platform:** Datapack + Optional Fabric Mod  

---

## 1. Executive Summary

The Soul Embodiment system transforms vanilla Minecraft tools and weapons into persistent, leveling "living items." The wielder's soul absorbs experience from their deeds (tracked via vanilla statistics), and totems act as conduits to channel that stored energy into the weapon. Weapons gain randomized buffs/debuffs through a progression system spanning 100 levels across 18 ascension tiers.

This document provides complete technical specifications for developers, server administrators, and contributors.

---

## 2. System Architecture

### 2.1 High-Level Overview

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Ritual Layer"
        R1[Soul Embodiment Ritual<br/>Star Pattern Detection]
        R2[Soul Ascension Ritual<br/>Level Cap Increase]
    end
    
    subgraph "Core Systems"
        C1[Item Data Manager<br/>custom_data storage]
        C2[XP Tracking System<br/>Statistics-based]
        C3[Level Processor<br/>Threshold checks]
        C4[Buff/Debuff Engine<br/>Stacking & conflicts]
    end
    
    subgraph "I/O Systems"
        I1[Totem Sync<br/>Item pickup]
        I2[Scrying Glass<br/>Portable sync]
        I3[Lore Generator<br/>Dynamic tooltips]
        I4[Comment System<br/>Random speech]
    end
    
    subgraph "Configuration"
        CF1[XP Rates<br/>mcfunction files]
        CF2[Soul Names<br/>JSON config]
        CF3[Comments<br/>JSON config]
    end
    
    R1 --> C1
    R2 --> C1
    C2 --> C3
    C3 --> C4
    C4 --> I3
    I1 --> C2
    I2 --> C2
    CF1 --> C2
    CF2 --> I3
    CF3 --> I4
    
    style R1 fill:#4a148c,color:#fff
    style R2 fill:#4a148c,color:#fff
    style C1 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style C2 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style C3 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style C4 fill:#1565c0,color:#fff
    style I1 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I2 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I3 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I4 fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
```

### 2.2 Data Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant P as Player
    participant T as Tick System
    participant S as Statistics
    participant X as XP Calculator
    participant I as Item NBT
    participant L as Lore Generator
    
    P->>P: Uses soul weapon
    P->>S: Vanilla stat increments
    T->>S: Read current stats
    T->>T: Calculate delta from previous
    T->>X: Pass delta to calculator
    X->>X: Apply XP rates per block/mob
    X->>I: Store pending XP in scoreboard
    
    Note over P,I: On Sync (Totem/Scrying)
    
    P->>I: Trigger sync
    I->>I: Apply pending XP
    I->>I: Check level threshold
    I->>I: Roll buff/debuff
    I->>L: Request lore update
    L->>I: Write new lore component
```

---

## 3. Data Storage Schema

### 3.1 Item Custom Data Structure

```json
{
  "minecraft:custom_data": {
    // Core identification
    "soul_embodied": true,
    "soul_type": "sword",
    
    // Identity
    "soul_name": "Grimfang",
    "soul_display_name": "Grimfang",
    
    // Progression
    "soul_level": 47,
    "soul_xp": 12850,
    "soul_xp_total": 98420,
    "soul_ascension_tier": 7,
    "soul_level_cap": 50,
    
    // Buff/Debuff tracking
    "soul_buff_levels": {
      "haste": 2,
      "strength": 3,
      "magnetic": 1
    },
    "soul_debuff_levels": {
      "hungry": 1
    },
    
    // State flags
    "soul_ready_ascend": false,
    "soul_fractured": false,
    
    // Statistics
    "soul_kills": 2847,
    "soul_blocks_broken": 15420
  }
}
```

### 3.2 Scoreboard Objectives

| Objective | Type | Purpose |
|-----------|------|---------|
| `rituals.soul_xp_gain` | dummy | Pending XP to sync |
| `rituals.soul_holder` | dummy | Marks soul item holders |
| `rituals.pickaxe_mined` | dummy | Running total for pickaxe |
| `rituals.shovel_mined` | dummy | Running total for shovel |
| `rituals.axe_mined` | dummy | Running total for axe |
| `rituals.hoe_mined` | dummy | Running total for hoe |
| `rituals.sword_kills` | dummy | Running total for sword |
| `rituals.prev_mined` | dummy | Previous value for delta |
| `rituals.soul_speak_cd` | dummy | Comment cooldown timer |
| `rituals.m_*` | minecraft.mined:* | 500+ block tracking |
| `rituals.k_*` | minecraft.killed:* | 50+ mob tracking |

### 3.3 Storage Namespace

```
rituals:soul
├── level_thresholds[]     # XP required per level (100 entries)
├── tier_caps[]            # Level cap per tier [15,20,25,...,100]
├── fallback_names[]       # Default soul names
├── bonus_chance           # Ascension bonus % (default: 50)
└── xp_values{}            # Base XP multipliers

rituals:temp
├── soul_type              # Current operation soul type
├── lore_level             # Level for lore generation
└── buff_roll              # Random roll result
```

---

## 4. XP Tracking System

### 4.1 Statistics-Based Tracking

The system uses vanilla `minecraft.mined:*` and `minecraft.killed:*` statistics instead of durability tracking. This ensures:
- Unbreaking enchantment doesn't slow XP gain
- Netherite tools gain XP at the same rate as iron
- Accurate tracking even with efficiency enchantments

### 4.2 Block XP Mapping

```mermaid
pie showData
    title Pickaxe XP Distribution by Block Tier
    "Basic Stone (1 XP)" : 65
    "Special Stone (2 XP)" : 15
    "Common Ores (2-4 XP)" : 10
    "Rare Ores (10-25 XP)" : 8
    "Special (3-5 XP)" : 2
```

#### Pickaxe Blocks (400+ blocks tracked)

| Category | XP Value | Examples |
|----------|----------|----------|
| Basic Stone | 1 | Stone, Cobblestone, Deepslate variants |
| Processed Stone | 1 | Bricks, Terracotta, Concrete |
| Prismarine/Quartz | 2 | All prismarine variants, quartz blocks |
| End Blocks | 2 | End stone, Purpur |
| Coal/Copper Ore | 2 | Including deepslate variants |
| Iron Ore | 3 | Including deepslate variants |
| Redstone/Quartz Ore | 3 | Nether quartz ore |
| Gold/Lapis Ore | 4 | Including nether gold |
| Diamond Ore | 10 | Including deepslate variants |
| Emerald Ore | 12 | Including deepslate variants |
| Ancient Debris | 25 | Netherite source |
| Obsidian | 3 | Regular and crying |

#### Mob XP Mapping (50+ mobs tracked)

| Tier | XP Value | Examples |
|------|----------|----------|
| Passive | 2 | Pig, Cow, Sheep, Chicken |
| Common | 5 | Zombie, Skeleton, Spider, Creeper |
| Uncommon | 10 | Enderman, Witch, Piglin |
| Dangerous | 15 | Blaze, Ghast, Wither Skeleton |
| Elite | 25 | Evoker, Ravager, Elder Guardian |
| Warden | 100 | Ancient City guardian |
| Boss | 500 | Wither, Ender Dragon |

### 4.3 Delta Calculation

```mcfunction
# Calculate XP gained since last check
scoreboard players operation @s rituals.pickaxe_mined = #total rituals.soul_temp
scoreboard players operation #xp_gain rituals.soul_temp = @s rituals.pickaxe_mined
scoreboard players operation #xp_gain rituals.soul_temp -= @s rituals.prev_mined

# Award XP if positive delta
execute if score #xp_gain rituals.soul_temp matches 1.. run function rituals:soul/award_xp
scoreboard players operation @s rituals.prev_mined = @s rituals.pickaxe_mined
```

---

## 5. Leveling System

### 5.1 XP Curve Formula

```
XP_required(level) = base_xp × (level ^ 1.5) + (level × 50)
```

Where `base_xp = 100`

### 5.2 Level Thresholds

| Level | XP Required | Cumulative | Tier |
|-------|-------------|------------|------|
| 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| 15 | 2,808 | 14,808 | 1 MAX |
| 20 | 3,944 | 24,944 | 2 |
| 50 | 11,221 | 122,221 | 8 |
| 75 | 16,894 | 218,394 | 13 |
| 100 | 28,631 | 420,631 | 18 MAX |

### 5.3 Tier Progression

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Tier1: Awakening Ritual
    
    Tier1 --> Tier1: Level 1-15
    Tier1 --> Tier2: Ascension I
    
    Tier2 --> Tier2: Level 16-20
    Tier2 --> Tier3: Ascension II
    
    Tier3 --> TierN: ...continues...
    TierN --> Tier17: Ascension XVI
    
    Tier17 --> Tier17: Level 91-95
    Tier17 --> Tier18: Final Ascension
    
    Tier18 --> Tier18: Level 96-100
    Tier18 --> [*]: OMEGA Achieved
```

---

## 6. Buff/Debuff System

### 6.1 Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Level Up Triggered] --> B{Roll Buff}
    B --> C[Select Random Buff]
    C --> D{Already Have Buff?}
    D -->|No| E[Apply New Buff]
    D -->|Yes| F{At Max Stack?}
    F -->|No| G[Increment Stack Level]
    F -->|Yes| H[Re-roll Different Buff]
    
    A --> I{Roll Debuff<br/>30% chance}
    I -->|No| J[No Debuff]
    I -->|Yes| K[Select Random Debuff]
    K --> L{Check Incompatibility}
    L -->|Blocked| M[Debuff Blocked]
    L -->|OK| N{Already Have Debuff?}
    N -->|No| O[Apply New Debuff]
    N -->|Yes| P{At Max Stack?}
    P -->|No| Q[Increment Stack Level]
    P -->|Yes| R[Re-roll]
    
    A --> S{Roll Fracture<br/>10% chance}
    S -->|Yes| T[SOUL FRACTURED<br/>Permanent]
```

### 6.2 Buff Registry

| ID | Name | Max Level | Per Level | Type |
|----|------|-----------|-----------|------|
| `haste` | Soul Haste | 3 | +10% mining speed | Attribute |
| `glow` | Soul Sight | 1 | Glowing 10 blocks | Effect |
| `magnetic` | Magnetic Pull | 2 | +2 block radius | Special |
| `reach` | Extended Reach | 3 | +0.5 block reach | Attribute |
| `repair` | Soul Mending | 3 | 0.5% repair/tick | Special |
| `lucky` | Fortune's Favor | 2 | +0.5 luck | Attribute |
| `swift` | Soul Speed | 3 | +3% movement | Attribute |
| `strong` | Soul Strength | 4 | +0.5 attack damage | Attribute |
| `tough` | Soul Armor | 3 | +1 armor | Attribute |
| `jump` | Featherweight | 1 | Jump Boost I | Potion |
| `flame` | Soul Flame | 2 | 10% ignite chance | Special |
| `leech` | Soul Leech | 2 | 5% lifesteal | Special |
| `wisdom` | Soul Wisdom | 2 | +10% XP gain | Special |
| `harvest` | Soul Harvest | 2 | Looting I per level | Special |
| `unbreaking` | Eternal Edge | 2 | 25% less durability | Special |
| `nightvis` | Dark Vision | 1 | Night Vision (15s) | Potion |
| `waterbreath` | Aquatic Soul | 1 | Water Breathing (10s) | Potion |
| `fireresist` | Flame Ward | 1 | Fire Resist (10s) | Potion |
| `saturation` | Soul Sustenance | 2 | Tiny saturation | Special |
| `reserved` | Reserved Soul | 1 | 8-75 min comments | Personality |

### 6.3 Debuff Registry

| ID | Name | Max Level | Per Level | Type |
|----|------|-----------|-----------|------|
| `hungry` | Ravenous Soul | 2 | 0.25%/tick hunger | Special |
| `heavy` | Burdened | 2 | -3% movement | Attribute |
| `cursed` | Cursed Aura | 1 | Rare Bad Omen | Special |
| `fragile` | Brittle Edge | 2 | +25% durability loss | Special |
| `restless` | Restless Soul | 1 | Alerts nearby mobs | Special |
| `clumsy` | Clumsy Grip | 2 | Mining fatigue chance | Special |
| `unlucky` | Misfortune | 2 | -0.5 luck | Attribute |
| `xp_hungry` | Soul Hunger | 2 | +20% XP needed | Special |
| `paranoid` | Paranoid Soul | 1 | Random spooky sounds | Special |
| `bloodthirst` | Bloodthirst | 1 | 1 dmg/30s if no combat | Special |
| `chatty` | Chatty Soul | 1 | 2-35 min comments | Personality |

### 6.4 Incompatibility Matrix

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Blocked Pairs"
        A[Swift] <--> B[Heavy]
        C[Lucky] <--> D[Unlucky]
        E[Repair] <--> F[Fragile]
        G[Unbreaking] <--> H[Fragile]
        I[Saturation] <--> J[Hungry]
        K[Reserved] <--> L[Chatty]
        M[Fireresist] <--> N[Waterbreath]
        O[Fireresist] <--> P[Soulfire]
    end
    
    style A fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style C fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style E fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style G fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style I fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style K fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style M fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style O fill:#2e7d32,color:#fff
    style B fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style D fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style F fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style H fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style J fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style L fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style N fill:#c62828,color:#fff
    style P fill:#c62828,color:#fff
```

---

## 7. File Structure

```
data/rituals/function/
├── soul/
│   ├── init.mcfunction              # System initialization
│   ├── tick.mcfunction              # Per-tick processing
│   ├── awaken_item.mcfunction       # Item transformation
│   ├── check_player_action.mcfunction # Route to tool handlers
│   ├── award_xp.mcfunction          # XP accumulation
│   ├── sync_from_totem.mcfunction   # Apply pending XP
│   ├── process_level_up.mcfunction  # Level threshold check
│   ├── do_level_up.mcfunction       # Apply level increase
│   ├── mark_ready_ascend.mcfunction # Cap reached flag
│   │
│   ├── actions/
│   │   ├── mining.mcfunction        # Pickaxe XP (400+ blocks)
│   │   ├── digging.mcfunction       # Shovel XP
│   │   ├── chopping.mcfunction      # Axe XP (blocks)
│   │   ├── harvesting.mcfunction    # Hoe XP
│   │   ├── combat.mcfunction        # Sword XP
│   │   ├── axe_combat.mcfunction    # Axe XP (mobs)
│   │   └── ranged.mcfunction        # Bow/Crossbow XP
│   │
│   ├── scoreboards/
│   │   ├── load.mcfunction          # Master loader
│   │   ├── pickaxe.mcfunction       # 400+ block objectives
│   │   ├── shovel.mcfunction        # Shovel block objectives
│   │   ├── axe.mcfunction           # Axe block objectives
│   │   ├── hoe.mcfunction           # Hoe block objectives
│   │   └── combat.mcfunction        # Mob kill objectives
│   │
│   ├── buffs/
│   │   ├── init.mcfunction          # Registry initialization
│   │   ├── roll_on_levelup.mcfunction
│   │   ├── roll_buff.mcfunction
│   │   ├── roll_debuff.mcfunction
│   │   ├── apply_buff.mcfunction
│   │   ├── apply_debuff.mcfunction
│   │   └── apply_effects.mcfunction # Apply held item effects
│   │
│   ├── lore/
│   │   ├── build_full.mcfunction    # Construct lore array
│   │   └── apply_full.mcfunction    # Write to item
│   │
│   ├── name/
│   │   ├── apply_display.mcfunction # Set custom_name
│   │   └── detect_anvil_rename.mcfunction
│   │
│   └── comments/
│       └── try_speak.mcfunction     # Random comment trigger
│
├── ritual/patterns/star/
│   ├── detect_soul_embodiment.mcfunction
│   ├── activate_soul_embodiment.mcfunction
│   ├── detect_soul_ascension.mcfunction
│   ├── activate_soul_ascension.mcfunction
│   └── route_soul_ritual.mcfunction
│
└── config/
    ├── load.mcfunction              # Main config loader
    └── soul_xp/
        ├── load.mcfunction          # XP config loader
        ├── pickaxe_blocks.mcfunction
        ├── shovel_blocks.mcfunction
        ├── axe_blocks.mcfunction
        └── hoe_blocks.mcfunction
```

---

## 8. Configuration

### 8.1 XP Rates

Located in `data/rituals/function/config/load.mcfunction`:

```mcfunction
# Base XP per action type
data modify storage rituals:soul xp_values set value {
    block_mined: 1,
    ore_mined: 5,
    mob_killed: 10,
    boss_killed: 100
}

# Ascension bonus chance (0-100)
data modify storage rituals:soul bonus_chance set value 50

# Debuff chance (0-100)  
data modify storage rituals:soul debuff_chance set value 30

# Fracture chance (0-100)
data modify storage rituals:soul fracture_chance set value 10
```

### 8.2 Block XP Configuration

Located in `data/rituals/function/config/soul_xp/*.mcfunction`:

```mcfunction
# Example: pickaxe_blocks.mcfunction
# Diamond ore = 10 XP
data modify storage rituals:soul_xp pickaxe.diamond_ore set value 10
data modify storage rituals:soul_xp pickaxe.deepslate_diamond_ore set value 10

# Ancient debris = 25 XP
data modify storage rituals:soul_xp pickaxe.ancient_debris set value 25
```

### 8.3 JSON Configs

Located in `config/rituals/`:

| File | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `soul_names.json` | 500+ names per tool type |
| `soul_comments.json` | 150+ random comments |
| `soul_settings.json` | System parameters |

---

## 9. Performance Considerations

### 9.1 Optimizations Implemented

1. **Statistics-based tracking** - No per-tick durability checks
2. **Delta calculation** - Only process XP changes, not absolute values
3. **Cooldown-based comments** - Not probability per tick
4. **Batched lore updates** - Only on sync, not continuous
5. **Conditional tick execution** - Skip players without soul items

### 9.2 Tick Complexity

| Operation | Frequency | Complexity |
|-----------|-----------|------------|
| Soul holder check | Every tick | O(players) |
| XP tracking | Every tick (if holding) | O(1) per player |
| Lore update | On sync only | O(1) |
| Comment roll | Cooldown-based | O(1) |
| Buff effects | Every tick (if holding) | O(buffs) |

---

## 10. Compatibility

### 10.1 Vanilla Minecraft

- ✅ Enchanting table fully functional
- ✅ Anvil repairs preserve soul data
- ✅ Grindstone removes enchants, keeps soul
- ✅ Anvil renaming preserves decorators
- ✅ All vanilla enchantments compatible

### 10.2 Data Storage Isolation

```
Item Components:
├── minecraft:custom_data     ← Soul system uses ONLY this
├── minecraft:enchantments    ← Vanilla enchantments (untouched)
├── minecraft:custom_name     ← Formatted display name
├── minecraft:lore            ← Dynamic tooltip
└── minecraft:damage          ← Durability (untouched)
```

---

## 11. Known Limitations

1. **Item stacking** - Soul items cannot stack (unique data per item)
2. **Creative mode** - XP tracking uses survival statistics only
3. **Silk Touch mining** - Ore XP based on block broken, not drops
4. **Mob farms** - All kills count regardless of kill method
5. **Item cloning** - Duplicated items share soul identity (by design)

---

## 12. Future Enhancements

- [ ] Per-player soul weapon leaderboards
- [ ] Soul weapon trading/gifting system
- [ ] Custom particle effects for high-level souls
- [ ] Soul fusion (combine two soul weapons)
- [ ] Achievement system for soul milestones

---

## 13. References

- [Minecraft Wiki - Statistics](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Statistics)
- [Minecraft Wiki - Item Components](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Data_component_format)
- [Rituals Datapack Documentation](../README.md)

---

*Document maintained by the Rituals development team.*
